---
layout: post
title: What is The Law?
permalink: /essays/the-law
published: false
---

> Where there is no vision, the people perish:  
	but he that keepeth the law, happy is he.

— Proverbs 29:18

<br>

Every since the very first dawn of man, there is a Law in operation. This Law is the law of God, of light: of man‘s fullest emancipation from his old animal nature. The Law was there, is there, and will be there for ever. But we are concerned with the marveling peak of life itself: man: upright, vital, godly. The latter, unlike the immutable Law that is as unchanging as light, is moving, is evolving. And this movement is multifaceted. It is **an evolving reciprocity**, a “holographic“ flower increasing in brightness, as to for the first time recognize what it was all the time. This evolving reciprocity is that of man‘s evolving sense of life, and the evolving of reciprocal communication technologies. We err if we entrench such an elemental life-outlook in sight of our beholded orthodox insistance on the unchanging quality of Law (whether of solely religious origin or more literary) that takes the very evolving life itself I describe above as the static. To assume so would make it appear that we believe that this very life is already as perfect as God, which it is not.

So man as such, the life he lives, walks, reads and struggles trough, the inevitable grave fact of his finite mortality, the (primary) community and order he finds himself in, the edifices and living structures erected all around him, the (primary) mediums of communication that envelop and make sense of his whole life ... all this I take to be anything but static, anything but perfect.

In the younger years of mankind‘s growth, God chose to give the Law to the people of Israel. The main medium of purveying and diffusing the law over the children of Israel was preaching of the One God in the synagogues (late Latin from Greek sunagōgē ‘meeting’, from sun- ‘together’ + agein ‘bring’). These were the efforts of the fasting prophets, who in the brilliance of their vision wrote down their God-given insights, and via the written down medium could preserve and communicate the Law (from Hebrew tōrāh ‘instruction, doctrine, law’, from yārāh ‘show, direct, instruct’) to the fickle heathen. With the Jewish people, the proper life-outlook of world-as-history was born. The biblical prophecies are inseperable from the evolving of life and historical movement (for example, the treatment of jewish people‘s emancipation from the Egyptian captivity). It considers the primary current of life, leading and ending in Law fully realized on this earth (the Kingdom of God).

But however great the significance of the jewish people, they eventually tended to discount the universality of the law, thereby slightly falling short of the brilliance of it, of God. It must have been for Christ to come, and fulfill the prophecies and visions of the prophets. Only he could fulfill the Law. And only thence the good news (Old English gōdspel, from gōd ‘good’ + spel ‘news, a story’) could spread around the world, proclaiming the truth that the Law is both for the Jew and the Greek, slaves and the masters, man and woman, short and the tall. **In short, that the Law is truly universal.** This was a major convertive and at the same time maturing treshold for mankind‘s development as such. Granted, christianity can, did, and does fall short of this universality: it is as imperfect as it is human. But we must not forget that there has never been, or is, and may I dare say never will be anything as universal and lasting as Christianity. In it‘s all-encompasing universality it is the synonym to the barest human experience itself.

We as moderns have a deeply ingrained, and very much unquestioned conviction operating behind our whole understanding of life: that we have succeeded the middle ages. What if our transvaluations of all laws and values is but a reaction, after which we are eventually forced to return to the laws we have hitherto abhored?

So if I take life as such, not as a static phenomena, but as something vital and moving (the same vitality of fresh air, alpine cold flowing brooks, vast blue heavens, nutritious vegetables ..), then I see a sort of spiralic movement that is evolving, from a larger, hence increasingly brightening holographic representation of the Kingdom of God realized on this earth (or the ways of the Laws fully realized). The horizontal movement of the spiral, the very engine of it‘s movement, is the one of unfolding and enfolding. This horizontal movement tends to be taken by the rather fickle heathen as the sole recurrent truth (the unmoved movement making this life static; or the predominance of world-as-nature). But the spiral has also a vertical direction, and that is the evolving fulfilment of law. While man is still born with the instinctive hereditary and congenital predispositions of the animalistic (mimetic desire and rivalry; love and identity that is barbaric), ever since the one who has _wholly_ fulfilled the Law in Golgotha has shown to man, he _can_ grow and overcome the animalistic, raise to the dignity of being wholly human (evolving and co-participating in the fulfilment of Law). Notwithstanding the reign of the animalistic qualities over man (owing to it‘s congenital origin from which only few may emancipate), the great vertical engine of the spiral, the very propulsive force of life, is the judeochristian tide, which is with it‘s still recent Christ‘s revelation becoming ever more all-enfolding and universal. Perhaps in our time it is reaching such universality, that it is overgrowing the “Christianity“ (for we moderns came to recognize the limitations of language) itself, taking hold of all it‘s enemies and “non-religious people“ (the latter I mean the moderns).

So if I may simplify, modernity is a reaction to medieval non-religiosity.

But the vertical evolution of the spiral is always operating behind all of this. The horizontal movement of unfolding and enfolding (I wonder if this approximates intellectual dialectic) is manifested as the back and forth quality of the Law. In the periods of enfoldment, the Law is unified and orthodox. In the periods of unfoldment, it is more spread out. But the Law always was, is, and will be. **The change of these swings is mainly propeled by the communication technologies**, or how the Law is spread. The very evolution of life is synonymous with the incessant struggle of reconciling the Law and the communication technologies, yet it is the latter that improves and fulfills the former, rather than harming it (although the latter most certainly happens on shorter time horizons; there are the dark ages of communication technologies, and we may live in such an age).

For the early Christianity, to establish unity of Law was less difficult, owing to then temporal conditions of communication technologies. This came to flower in the early medieval times. But as if by fate, the increasing corruption of the church, it‘s swaying from the Law, eventually gave birth to a radically new medium of communication: the printing press. Henceforth more people could read the good news for themselves, more were enabled to truly judge for themselves. This force at the same time fractured the unity of church (even though it‘s orthodox unity was corrupted, it‘s stifle ambience devoid of freshness of evolving life - evolving to the higher ideal of Christ - a flowering withdrawal-and-return). Since the printing press, the Law became more multivalent, more diverse (such as the more varied visions of God, be it the visions of literary man like Spinoza, Leibniz or Berkley), but also more ridden with internal contradictions and strife which could even lead to the loss of it‘s definite unity as per later modernity (the catastrophes of the 20th century; a loss which is but illusory).

But we live in a peculiar, strange age of transition, not the least significant as the period when the printing press was born. The order of our age (**the order which may be such universal that it does not recognize it‘s “Christianity“** (for even we moderns came to know that the language is not the Law itself, but the vital Holy Ghost)) is also becoming more and more corrupted (the withering relics of the nation-states, all the institutions pervaded with wickedness, the rule of credentialism over spirit and merit ...), **and the new communication technology — the internet — come to rescue the Law, again as if by fate.**

I want to be careful with our ideas of the internet. **I believe we would commit a great error if we form any “locked in“ ideas and notions of what the internet is.** We must not fog our vision by believing that the internet has happened “a long time ago,“ and take the way it has been developing ever since for the last two decades being something inevitable. Most certainly, from a more lucid and sweeping stance of prophetic vision, born of our judeo-christian tradition, the internet is just being born. It is the elemental medium of communication that is the chief determining medium of the evolvement of Law in our life. We see it in action. It‘s action being both questionable, but also patently clear in it‘s “trending intent.“ As of writing this, millions of books produced in the period after the previous primary communication medium, the printing press, the very books that are **the multivalent unfolding of the One Law**, are in a Manhattan project-esque scale effort being scanned online. If, in the late period of grand reaction to medieval times (which some call modernity and the age of books (literary man)), we, as dazed latecomers still cling to the attitude of transvaluating all laws and inventing new ideas and sweeping metaphysical structures, then we only play a pity on ourselves. Our modern forefathers bestowed us with a varied scope of ideas, but it‘s scope has eventually overgrown to an unhealthy degree, such that the very essence of the whole effort — the Logos of the Law — was lost, which then inevitably gave rise to a period of conflicts and nihilism (the end of the 19th and the first half of the 20th century). We must see the brilliant minds of Alan Turing and the like to be the unnoticable seeds for the next primary communication technology or medium that is restoring the uprightness to the corrupting order, more and more falling from grace to the dark and shallow depths of wickedness.

The chief task of our life is to most appropriately and oganicaly co-evolve with the internet ([like this](app://obsidian.md/E-Ink_V.mp4)) (that alone being a daring challange, since our present habits of using the computer are far from optimal), the primary communication technology that is at the captain wheel of the primary current (here we are more of a world-as-history outlook, rather than the more immediate and sole-relative, sole-causal world-as-nature, with it‘s tendency to sheer withdrawal to a sort of pagan nirvanic enclave, rather than a return and participation in the destiny). Thereby, our attitudes are in the process of alteration, evolving from the literary culture of printing press and all the “mass“ individualist transvaluations characteristic of modern attitude. Our chief task is thereby not to invent new ideas and add another new interpretation to the growing mush of fragmented modernity. Our chief task is rather to use the computation technologies and the primary communication medium of our era — the internet — to connect and harmonize the plethora of interpretations. From this, new ideas are certain to arise, but only as a by-product of a thorough integrative effort. The more connections are established (and the evolving computation technologies connected by the internet inevitably do this ever more), the more there is simplicity. This is already the trend leading to the simplicity of the unified Law. Thus we may say that the multivalent quantities of books are all in the process of becoming one book. As we scan all the books, and the shared humankind‘s efforts make more and more connections (depending on their aptness in most fertile interaction with the computer), **the simplicity of the One Book will eventually arise by itself from the medium of the internet.** **The emergence of this One Book, this one Law, is the second coming.** A world, a basic human reciprocity wholly drained and void of all violence and rivalry: hitherto unimagined condition for a whole of mankind. For the rare moments of withdrawn sage must not remain in a little enclave. The Light must return and take hold of whole mankind. There was already a cosmical event of an annointed one, foreseen thousands of years ahead by the lucid and sweeping foresight of fasting prophets of Israel. Only he, for the first time in the evolution of life, had the complete courage to return. Nothing like this can ever be repeated again.

Christ is the enfolding beginning and ending, is the law. But christians — the people who service and sustain the church, _and hence also the church_ — are not. Those same christians who create and use the evolving communication technologies, of which the very essence is the fulfilling, spreading of the law on this earth (although this is almost never plainly obvious).

Christ leads the willing (leads life itself: taken universally), and drags the unwilling.

We must live _for_ Christ, and never live _of_ Christ.  
In the former, we are the spearhead of life and evolution, are truly and fully human, all in the sight of Christ. In the latter we join hands in the corruption of this world.  
(Perhaps a more peculiar effort with technology can certainly coincide with the former).





